Add query plan cache for SELECT queries (#99309)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/operations/query-plan-cache.md

---

> description: 'Guide to using and configuring the experimental query plan cache feature in ClickHouse'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: 'Guide to using and configuring the query plan cache feature in ClickHouse'
```

Author: Updated the description as suggested.

sidebar_label: 'Query plan cache'
sidebar_position: 66
slug: /operations/query-plan-cache
title: 'Query plan cache'
doc_type: 'guide'
---

:::note
The query plan cache is experimental. To use it, both `allow_experimental_query_plan_cache` and `enable_query_plan_cache` must be set to `1`. Only queries that also run with [enable_analyzer](/operations/settings/settings#enable_analyzer) (default) are eligible.
:::

## Background and motivation {#background-and-motivation}

> For repeated `SELECT` queries against the same table, ClickHouse spends a non-trivial amount of time on query planning: AST parsing produces an analyzer tree, the analyzer resolves names and types, and the planner produces a `QueryPlan` from which the executable pipeline is built.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For repeated `SELECT` queries against the same table, ClickHouse may spend a non-trivial amount of time on query planning: AST parsing produces an analyzer tree, the analyzer resolves names and types, and the planner produces a query plan from which the executable pipeline is built.
```

Author: Updated.

On a subsequent identical query, ClickHouse still parses the SQL text to build the cache lookup key. If a matching entry is found and its dependencies are still valid, ClickHouse skips analysis and planning, deserializes the cached plan, re-binds it to the current table snapshot, and re-validates access rights before execution.

Unlike the [query cache](query-cache.md), which caches query *results*, the query plan cache caches only the *plan*: every cache hit still executes the query and reads up-to-date data.
This makes the query plan cache transactionally consistent — there is no risk of returning stale rows.

## How it works {#how-it-works}

When a `SELECT` query is admitted, the cached plan is built in two stages so that it can be reused across the table snapshots that exist at insert time vs. lookup time:

- *Universalize*: before serialization, every `ReadFromMergeTree` (and similar storage-bound steps) is replaced with a storage-independent `ReadFromTableStep` that carries only the `StorageID` and the columns to read. Storage-specific state (parts, marks, prewhere actions) is stripped.

> - *Materialize*: on a cache hit, the universalized plan is deserialized and `resolveStorages` rebinds each `ReadFromTableStep` to the current `IStorage` snapshot, restoring a directly executable `QueryPlan`.

Reviewer: Rewrite from in code class names to corresponding abstraction names.

- For each table referenced in the query: the table's metadata version (or, for non-replicated tables, a content hash over column names + types + sorting/partition/primary key expressions).
- The hash of the SELECT row policy expression, if any.
- The current user identity and the sorted list of currently active role IDs.

`SYSTEM DROP QUERY PLAN CACHE` invalidates the cache eagerly. Schema changes, role changes, and row policy changes invalidate cache entries lazily — the next lookup will compute a different key and miss.

## Configuration settings and usage {#configuration-settings-and-usage}

Two session settings together gate the feature:

- [`allow_experimental_query_plan_cache`](/operations/settings/settings#allow_experimental_query_plan_cache) — experimental gate (default `0`).
- [`enable_query_plan_cache`](/operations/settings/settings#enable_query_plan_cache) — per-query toggle once the gate is enabled (default `0`).

A third setting controls per-user accounting:

> - [`query_plan_cache_size_in_bytes_quota`](/operations/settings/settings#query_plan_cache_size_in_bytes_quota) — admission quota in bytes for the current user. `0` means unlimited.

Reviewer: Why is per-user quota needed? What is the motivation?

Author: Aggreed. I removed the per-user quota.

The maximum total cache size and entry count are controlled by the server-level settings `query_plan_cache.max_size_in_bytes` and `query_plan_cache.max_entries`. Both can be reloaded at runtime via `SYSTEM RELOAD CONFIG`.

Example:

```sql
SELECT a, b FROM hits WHERE EventDate = '2024-01-01'
SETTINGS allow_experimental_query_plan_cache = 1,
         enable_query_plan_cache = 1;
```

The first execution serializes and stores the plan. Subsequent executions of the same query (same AST, same planner-relevant settings, same user/roles, same schema version) skip planning and reuse the cached plan.

## Eligibility {#eligibility}

A query is admitted to the cache only if **all** of the following hold:

- The statement is a single `SELECT` against exactly one table (no `JOIN`, no `UNION` of multiple subqueries, no scalar/`IN`-subquery references to other tables).

> - The table is a direct local, non-system, non-view `MergeTree`-family storage. Distributed tables, table functions, dictionaries, views, materialized views, and wrapper engines such as `Buffer` or `Merge` are excluded.

Reviewer: I think these are the most interesting cases to support.

Author: Agreed that these are useful cases. This first version intentionally supports only one direct local MergeTree table, since the other cases require different dependency and access-control handling. I'd prefer to add them incrementally in follow-up PRs with dedicated tests.
